---
title: "Metabolomic markers of glucose regulation after a lifestyle intervention in prediabetes"
author: 
    - name: "Magdalena Sevilla-Gonzalez"
      affiliations: 
        - name: "Massachusetts General Hospital"
date: "2022-09-12"
---

**Introduction:**

Disentangling the specific factors that regulate glycemia from
prediabetes to normoglycemia could improve type 2 diabetes prevention
strategies. Metabolomics provides substantial insights into the
biological understanding of environmental factors such as diet. This
study aimed to identify metabolomic markers of regression to
normoglycemia in the context of a lifestyle intervention (LSI) in
individuals with prediabetes.

**Methods:**

We conducted a single-arm intervention study with 24 weeks of follow-up.
Eligible study participants had at least one prediabetes criteria
according to the American Diabetes Association guidelines, and BMI
between 25 and 45kg/m2. LSI refers to a hypocaloric diet and &gt;150 min
of physical activity per week. Regression to normoglycemia (RNGR) was
defined as achieving HbA1c &lt;5.5% in the final visit. Baseline and
post-intervention plasma metabolomic profiles were measured using liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS). To select metabolites
associated with RNGR, we conducted the least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator-penalized regressions (LASSO).

**Results:**

 The final sample was composed of 82 study participants. Changes in
three metabolites were significantly associated with regression to
normoglycemia; N-Acetyl-D-galactosamine (OR= 0.54; 95%CI 0.32 - 0.82),
putrescine (OR= 0.90, 95%CI 0.81-0.98), and 7-methylguanine (OR =1.06;
95%CI 1.02-1.17), independent of HbA1c and weight loss. In addition,
metabolomic perturbations due to LSI displayed enrichment of taurine and
hypotaurine metabolism pathway (p=0.03) compatible with biomarkers of
protein consumption, lower red meat and animal fats, and higher seafood
and vegetables. 

**Conclusions:**

Evidence from this study suggests that specific metabolomic markers have
an influence on glucose regulation in individuals with prediabetes after
24 weeks of LSI independently of other treatment effects such as weight
loss.

Presentation format: *Flash presentation & Poster*
