---
title: "Effect of a high vs low glycemic index Mediterranean Diet in adults at risk of type 2 diabetes: The MEDGICarb trial"
author: 
    - name: "Therese Hjorth"
      affiliations: 
        - name: "Chalmers University of Technology"
date: "2022-09-12"
---

 

**Background:**

Elevated postprandial glucose concentrations may contribute to
development of impaired insulin secretion and impaired insulin
sensitivity observed in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. The
glycemic index (GI) of carbohydrate-containing foods plays an important
role in postprandial glucose concentrations. Consuming a healthy (HEP)
Mediterranean-style diet (MED) is supported by extensive evidence of a
reduced risk of the development of type 2 diabetes. Nevertheless, there
have been no studies assessing the contribution of high- vs low-GI foods
aiming to improve indices of glucose control and cardiometabolic health
in the context of a MED-HEP.

The aim of the trial was to investigate the long-term effects of a low
vs high GI on postprandial glycemia and glycemic variability in a
MED-HEP context.

**Method:**

A multicenter, randomized, controlled dietary intervention trial,
comparing high GI MED-HEP (GI value &gt; 70) versus low GI MED-HEP (GI
value &lt; 55)-GI diets in adults at risk for type 2 diabetes. For 12
weeks, participants consumed a low-GI or high-GI MED-HEP. Assessment of
postprandial plasma glucose and insulin responses (eight hours after
breakfast and lunch), and daily glycemic variability via CGM were made
at baseline and post-intervention. 160 adults (86 females, 74 males)
with a waist circumference &gt; 102 cm (male) or &gt; 88 cm (females)
and additional ≥ 2 metabolic syndrome traits, completed the
intervention.

**Result:**

Postprandial insulin concentrations were higher after high-GI versus
low-GI test meals at baseline (*p&lt;/I&gt; = 0.004), but not
post-intervention (*p&lt;/I&gt; = 0.17). Postprandial glucose after
high-GI test meal increased post-intervention, being greater compared to
after low-GI test meal (\*p &lt;/I&gt;&lt; 0.001). Average daily glucose
concentrations decreased in both groups post-intervention. Indices of
24-h glycemic variability after the intervention were reduced in the
low-GI group compared to baseline and the high-GI group.

**Conclusion:**

These findings suggest that low-GI foods may be an important part of a
MED-HEP for postprandial and daily glucose control in people at risk for
type 2 diabetes.

 

**Keywords:**

Glycemic index, Mediterranean diet, Type 2 diabetes, postprandial
glucose 

 

References:<https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35277067/>

Presentation format: *Poster Only*
