---
title: "Plasma metabolite predictors of metabolic syndrome incidence and reversion"
author: 
    - name: "Zhila Semnani-Azad"
      affiliations: 
        - name: "Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health"
date: "2022-09-12"
---

**Background:**

Metabolic Syndrome (MetS) is a progressive pathophysiological state
defined by a cluster of cardiometabolic traits. However, little is known
on metabolites that may be predictors of MetS incidence or reversion.
Our objective was to identify plasma metabolites associated with MetS
incidence or MetS reversion.

**Methods:**

The study included 1,468 participants without cardiovascular disease but
at high cardiovascular risk at enrollment from two case-cohort studies
nested within the PREvención con DIeta MEDiterránea (PREDIMED) trial
with baseline metabolomics data. MetS was defined in accordance with the
updated harmonized International Diabetes Federation and the American
Heart Association/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute criteria.
MetS incidence was defined by not having MetS at baseline but meeting
the MetS criteria at a follow-up visit. MetS reversion was defined by
MetS at baseline but not meeting MetS criteria at a follow-up visit.
Plasma metabolome was profiled by LC-MS. Multivariable-adjusted Cox
regression models and elastic net regularized regressions were used to
assess the association between 385 known metabolites and MetS incidence
or reversion after adjusting for potential risk factors.

**Results:**

Of the 603 participants without baseline MetS, 298 developed MetS over
the median 4.4-year follow-up. Of the 865 participants with baseline
MetS, 285 experienced MetS reversion. A total of 103 and 88 individual
metabolites were associated with MetS incidence and MetS reversion,
respectively, after adjusting for confounders and false discovery rate
correction. A metabolomic signature comprised of 77 metabolites was
robustly associated with MetS incidence (HR per +1 SD: 1.56 (95%CI:
1.33-1.83)), and a metabolomic signature of 83 metabolites associated
with MetS reversion (HR per +1 SD: 1.44 (95%CI: 1.25-1.67)), both
p&lt;0.001. C34:2 phosphatidylethanolamine plasmalogen, isoleucine, and
C2 carnitine were the top positive metabolites (based on the
beta-coefficients) from the MetS incidence signature, while C38:2
phosphatidylcholine, phenylacetylglutamine and ribothymidine the top
negative metabolites. From the MetS reversion signature, C18:2
lipophosphatidylcholine, histidine, and C34:3 phosphatidylcholine
plasmalogen were the top positive metabolites, and alanine,
fructose-glucose-galactose, and C36:4 phosphatidylethanolamine
plasmalogen the top negative metabolites. 

Conclusion: We identified unique metabolomic signatures, which included
several plasma lipids and amino acids, associated with MetS incidence
and reversion.

Keywords: Metabolomics, Metabolic Syndrome

Presentation format: *Flash presentation & Poster*
