---
title: "Plasma metabolite signature of healthy lifestyle factors in midlife in relation to all-cause mortality"
author: 
    - name: "Anne-Julie Tessier"
      affiliations: 
        - name: "Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health"
date: "2022-09-12"
---

**Background:**

A healthy lifestyle has been associated with a lower risk of premature
death. Metabolic pathways of a healthy lifestyle and their association
with mortality remain to be understood. This study aimed to identify the
metabolomic signature of a healthy lifestyle score and examine its
prospective association with all-cause mortality.

**Method:**

The population included 12,146 participants from the Nurses’ Health
Study, Nurses’ Health Study II and Health Professionals Follow-Up Study
(83% women, 97% white, aged 54.9 ± 9.3 years). Plasma metabolites were
profiled using high-throughput liquid chromatography mass-spectrometry
at baseline. The healthy lifestyle score was computed by summing the
total number of baseline healthy lifestyle factors. Factors included the
Alternative Healthy Eating Index (upper 40%), moderate alcohol intake
(women: 5-15 g/day; men: 5-30 g/day) and moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity (≥30 minutes/day) assessed using validated questionnaires; and
self-reported smoking (never) and BMI (18.5-24.9 kg/m2). The
multi-metabolite signature was identified using elastic net regressions
with train test validation split (70-30%). Metabolic pathways were
determined using enrichment analysis. Multivariable Cox proportional
hazards regression was used to examine the association between the
healthy lifestyle metabolite signature and subsequent mortality risk.

**Results:**

The identified signature encompassed 88 metabolites and correlated with
the healthy lifestyle score (Pearson r=0.43 and 0.44 in the training and
test sets; p&lt;0.001).  While C18:0 sphingomyelin, creatine,
N2,N2-dimethylguanosine were inversely associated with a healthy
lifestyle (p&lt;0.001), beneficial glycerophospholipids showed positive
associations (p&lt;0.001). The methylhistidine metabolic pathway,
reflective of muscle protein breakdown and dietary protein source,
emerged as the most enriched metabolite set. Among individual healthy
lifestyle factors, the signature was most strongly associated with
normal BMI (p&lt;0.001). During up to 32y of follow-up, 3,851 deaths
were documented. The healthy lifestyle metabolite signature score was
inversely associated with mortality risk (HR=0.79 \[95% CI 0.73, 0.85\])
and remained significant after mutual adjustment for the healthy
lifestyle score (HR=0.84 \[95% CI 0.77, 0.91\]).

**Conclusions:**

In US middle-aged adults, a plasma metabolite signature related to a
healthy lifestyle was associated with lower subsequent mortality risk.
Findings provide novel insights into potential metabolic pathways
underlying the association between a healthy lifestyle and lower
premature mortality.

Presentation format: *Flash presentation & Poster*
