---
title: "Nutrition before surgery-Effects on muscle transcriptome"
author: 
    - name: "Britt-Marie Iresj√∂"
      affiliations: 
        - name: "Department of Surgery, University of Gothenburg"
date: "2022-09-12"
---

**Background:**

Recommendations of strict pre-operative fasting have later on become
replaced by provision of carbohydrate rich nutrition drinks prior to
surgery. Carbohydrate (cho) drinks are shown to reduce postoperative
insulin resistance and thus assumed to improve post-surgical muscle
protein metabolism with expectations to reduce morbidity and
complication rate, though meta-analyses indicate few clinical benefits.
However, such studies investigating skeletal muscle metabolism are
lacking. Therefore, our studies have evaluated skeletal muscle
transcriptome alterations related to carbohydrate and protein metabolism
by two different nutrition interventions.

**Method:**

Patients scheduled for major upper gastrointestinal cancer surgery were
asked to participate. Provision of either oral carbohydrate -rich
nutrition drinks (804 kcal cho/96 kcal protein) or provision of total
parenteral nutrition (400 kcal cho/180 kcal protein/350 kcal fat) were
administered in a 12-hours over-night period prior to surgery. The
control group received clear fluids only. Blood samples and abdominal
muscle biopsies were collected at operation start (n=38). Blood amino
acids were quantified by LC-MS/MS and muscle mRNA transcripts were
analyzed with Agilent SurePrint G3 Human GE v3 8x60K Microarrays. Data
evaluation was done in Genespring software v.14.9.1.

**Results:**

Statistical analyses indicated ~1200 transcripts as altered among groups
(Anova, p&lt;0.05). Post-Hoc analyses indicated ~500 transcripts as
altered by each nutrition protocol with most alterations specific to
each treatment. The results indicate that both carbohydrate rich
nutrition drinks and total parenteral nutrition influenced muscle
glucose metabolism, while transcript alterations related to protein
metabolism were induced by parenteral nutrition only (final manuscript
in preparation).

**Conclusions:**

Whole genome transcript analyses on skeletal muscle biopsies indicate
different "profiles" by the two nutrition interventions. Microarray
analyses is thus a suitable method to further study underlaying
mechanisms, such as activation of protein translation or glucose
metabolism, in response to short time nutrition interventions.

Keywords: pre-operative nutrition, transcriptomics, skeletal muscle,
protein metabolism

Presentation format: *Poster Only*
