---
title: "Metabolites associated to cardiovascular risk in people with type 2 diabetes: data from the TOSCA.IT trial"
author: 
    - name: "Marilena Vitale"
      affiliations: 
        - name: "Federico II University of Naples"
date: "2022-09-12"
---

**Background:**

Epidemiological evidence suggests that poor diet quality contributes to
a higher risk of lifestyle-related chronic diseases including
cardiovascular diseases and type 2 diabetes. Molecular mechanisms
responsible for the detrimental health effects are not well known in
particular in people with diabetes. Therefore, our aim is to evaluate
the metabolites associated to the food intake helping to understand the
key contributors for the cardiovascular risk prevention in people with
type 2 diabetes following a healthy or unhealthy diet.

**Method:**

230 subjects with type 2 diabetes were classified as following a Healthy
(125 people) or Unhealthy (105 people) diet based on the habitual intake
of fiber, polyphenols, and saturated fatty acids. Habitual diet was
evaluated using a validated version of the food frequency questionnaire.
The metabolomic analysis of plasma samples was performed using HPLC
combined with mass spectrometry (MS/MS).

**Results:**

People following the healthy diet were characterized by higher plasma
concentrations of phytochemicals as metabolic product of polyphenols. So
they present a better cardiometabolic profile linked to the consumption
of coffee and tea, two main sources of polyphenols, that characterize
the healthy diet. On the other side, the unhealthy diet, was
characterized by higher plasma concentrations of compounds involved in
protein and lipid metabolism, such as phenylalanine,
phosphatidylcholines and lysophosphatidylcholines.

**Conclusions:**

Novel metabolites in people with type 2 diabetes were associated with
cardiovascular risk factors. These results suggest that circulating
concentrations of several metabolites were correlated with beneficial
variations in the conventional clinic lipid profile and also of other
risk factors, thus providing further insight to the metabolic control in
people with diabetes. These findings are very important mostly in
diabetic patients, who already have an higher risk to develop
cardiovascular disease. Thanks to metabolomics is possible to increase
the knowledge of disease progression and provides approaches for
therapy.

Keywords: metabolomics; diabetes; habitual diet

Presentation format: *Flash presentation & Poster*
