---
title: "Proteomic metabolic health related to socioeconomic deprivation"
author: 
    - name: "Tynde Sandor"
      affiliations: 
        - name: "SomaLogic"
date: "2022-09-12"
---

**Background:**

Understanding how socioeconomic status influences access to health care
and other resources is essential to making sustainable and practical
metabolic health and nutritional recommendations. Assessing and
monitoring patients holistically and understanding the health impacts of
socioeconomic status can enable optimal decision making and
recommendations as it relates to nutrition. Large-scale proteomic
profiling using a novel aptamer-based technology to measure 7,000
proteins has facilitated the development and validation of blood-based
proteomic signatures for 11 different cardiometabolic
SomaSignal<sup>TM</sup> Tests (SST) in plasma.

**Method:**

We used clinical data and SST results in the psychosocial, behavioral,
and biological determinants of ill health (pSoBid) study to identify
differences in health status between socioeconomically advantaged and
deprived participants from Glasgow, Scotland. We used logistic
regression analyses to compare SST results between advantaged and
deprived study participants.

**Results:**

After correcting for multiple comparisons, socioeconomic deprivation was
associated with the following proteomic predictions: decreased
cardiorespiratory fitness (odds ratio (OR): 6.07, 90% confidence
interval (CI): 3.09-11.90), p-value: 0.0003), decreased estimated renal
function (OR: 3.00, 95% CI: 1.42-6.33, p-value: 0.008), increased risk
for cardiovascular disease (OR: 1.86, 95% CI: 1.56-2.21), increased
liver fat (OR: 1.26, 95% CI: 1.06-1.50, p-value: 0.02), and impaired
glucose tolerance (OR: 1.18, 95% CI: 1.06-1.31, p-value: 0.007). The
following test predictions were not associated with socioeconomic
status: resting energy rate, percent body fat, lean body mass, visceral
adiposity, and alcohol impact.

**Conclusions:**

These results demonstrate that participants with lower socioeconomic
status have proteomic signatures that are consistent with decreased
cardiometabolic health compared to participants with higher
socioeconomic status. This study shows that SST can be used to identify
proteomic phenotypes, which will be invaluable to help guide precision
metabolic health and nutrition recommendations that address the unique
needs of people with lower socioeconomic status.

Presentation format: *Flash presentation & Poster*
