---
title: "Intermittent fasting alleviates non-alcoholic steatohepatitis by regulating bile acid metabolism and promoting fecal bile acid excretion in high-fat and high-cholesterol diet fed mice"
author: 
    - name: "Honghui Guo"
      affiliations: 
        - name: "Guangdong Medical University"
date: "2022-09-12"
---

**Background:**

Intermittent fasting (IF) exhibits many health-promoting effects
including decreasing hepatic lipids accumulation and regulating gut
microbiota metabolism, but its protection against non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH) is still lacking. This study aims to investigate
the mechanism of IF alleviates NASH by regulating gut microbiota and
bile acids (BAs).

**Methods:**

Male C57BL/6J mice were fed with a high-fat and high-cholesterol (HFHC)
diet for 16 weeks to establish a NASH model. Then the mice continued
HFHC feeding and were treated with or without every other day fasting
for 10 weeks. Gut microbiota of the cecum are profiled by 16S rRNA gene
sequencing. BAs in serum, colon contents, and feces are measured by
ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled with triple quadrupole
mass spectrometry.

**Results:**

 IF decreased the body weights, insulin resistance, and hepatic
cholesterol accumulation. IF alleviated hepatic steatosis, ballooning,
and lobular inflammation. IF elevated the levels of hydrophilic BAs
including ursodeoxycholic acid, alpha-muricholic acid, beta-muricholic
acid, and tauro-beta-muricholic acid in colon contents and feces.
Moreover, IF increased the relative mRNA and protein levels of
cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase 1 (CYP7A1) in liver but decreased that of
farnesoid-X-receptor (FXR) and fibroblast growth factor 15(FGF15) in
ileum.

**Conclusions:**

IF alleviates NASH by regulating bile acid metabolism and promoting
fecal bile acid excretion.

Presentation format: *Poster Only*
