---
title: "Omics linking dietary pollutants to cardiovascular disease"
author: 
    - name: "Tessa Schillemans"
      affiliations: 
        - name: "Karolinska Institutet"
date: "2022-09-12"
---

**Background:**

Dietary exposure to persistent organic pollutants (POPs), including
organochlorine compounds (OCs) and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS), is prevalent and may be linked to cardiovascular disease (CVD)
development. To shed light on potential underlying mechanisms, we aimed
to discover genetic, proteomic and metabolic features that link POP
exposures with CVD risk using a “meet-in-the-middle” approach.

**Method:**

We used data from a nested case-control study on first incident
myocardial infarction and stroke from the Swedish Mammography Cohort –
Clinical (n=657). OCs, PFAS (LC-MS) and multiOmics (248 proteins from
Olink CVDII, CVDIII and Metabolism panels; 9511 metabolic features from
untargeted LCMS metabolomics and; 8110 gene variants selected from GWAS
on POP exposures) were measured in baseline plasma. Omics features
cross-sectionally associated with OCs and PFAS were selected using a
random forest-based algorithm followed by partial Spearman correlation
adjusting for confounders. POP-related omics features that also
prospectively associated with cardiovascular outcomes were then selected
using conditional logistic regression adjusted for confounders. Finally,
associations of the selected omics features with POP exposures and CVD
outcomes were visualized using the TriPlot approach.

**Results:**

Out of 17869 omics features, 29 (for OCs) and 12 (for PFAS) metabolite
features and proteins associated with exposures and CVD outcomes and
selected features were unique to OCs and PFAS exposures. OC-related
features associated with increased risk of CVD, whereas the inverse was
found for PFAS-related features (for myocardial infarction).
Associations of POP-related features with exposures and CVD outcomes
were diluted by adjustment for age and BMI for OCs but not for PFAS.
Whilst most of the PFAS-related features still need to be annotated,
several of the OC-related features indicate involvement of lipids and
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway.

**Conclusions:**

These results imply different molecular pathways with opposite effects
on CVD risk for OCs and PFAS.

Presentation format: *Flash presentation & Poster*
